PMID: 37604213
Title: Photodynamic therapy for ESKAPE pathogens: An emerging approach to combat antimicrobial resistance (AMR).
Authors: Mathur A., Parihar A., Modi S., Kalra A.
Journal: Microbial pathogenesis
Year: 2023
DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106307
PMC: 
Publication types: Journal Article; Review
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37604213/
DOI URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106307

--- Abstract ---
The increase in antimicrobial resistance, particularly in ESKAPE pathogens, has resulted in the dire need for new therapeutic approaches. ESKAPE is an acronym for a group of bacteria that are responsible for a majority of nosocomial and community acquired infections. The acronym stands for Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species. These pathogens are known for their ability to develop resistance to multiple antibiotics, making them difficult to treat thus posing a significant threat to public health. In light of the alarming consequences of antimicrobial resistance, it has been estimated that, in the absence of a substantial increase in the rate of development of new effective drugs, the number of casualties related to these infections will increase from about 700,000 in 2016 up to nearly 10,000,000 in 2050 [1]. One potential strategy to treat these pathogens is photodynamic therapy (PDT). In the early 20th century, Oscar Raab observed the phototoxicity of acridine red against Paramecium caudatum, while Tappenier and Jesionek demonstrated the photodynamic effects of eosin for treating cutaneous diseases. These discoveries laid the foundation for Photodynamic Therapy (PDT), which utilizes a non-toxic photosensitizer (PS) followed by targeted light irradiation for treatment [2]. PDT involves the use of a photosensitizer, a light source, and oxygen to eliminate highly active infectious pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi. PDT is known to possess several advantages including localized treatment and fewer side effects. Various photosensitizers and light sources have been assessed in different strains, showing promising results suggesting PDT to be a promising potential treatment option. PDT utilizes PS compounds with suitable light absorption that showcase effective results against the pathogens in vitro and in vivo, including BODIPY derivatives, Methylene Blue, and other dyes like porphyrin derivatives, phthalocyanines, indole derivatives, Photophrin, etc., inhibiting the growth of infections, for both in planktonic cells and in biofilms. Combination of PDT with other therapies like efflux pump inhibitors or quorum sensing inhibitors has also proven to be efficacious. However, this domain further needs to be assessed before it reaches the society.
